>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, APRIL 26:
DEVASTATION IN NEPAL FOLLOWING A
POWERFUL EARTHQUAKE AND
AFTERSHOCKS.
AS MANY AS 2,400 PEOPLE ARE
FEARED DEAD.
FOLLOWING A DAY OF PROTESTS OVER
THE DEATH OF A YOUNG AFRICAN
AMERICAN MAN IN POLICE CUSTODY,
TENSIONS IN BALTIMORE INCREASE
OVERNIGHT.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM NEW YORK: A BLOCK BY BLOCK
PLAN TO BRING INTERNET ACCESS TO
POOR RESIDENTS.
>> IT'S RIDICULOUSLY EXPENSIVE
HERE IN THE UNITED STATES TO
HAVE THIS BASIC THING IN YOUR
HOUSE THAT MAKES POSSIBLE EVERY
OTHER ASPECT OF LIFE.
>> Stewart: NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, THANKS
FOR JOINING FOR US.
THE DEATH TOLL IS MOUNTING IN
THE AFTERMATH OF THE MASSIVE 7.8
MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE THAT HAS
DEVASTATED A HUGE SWATH OF
NEPAL.
EMERGENCY WORKERS ARE
DESPERATELY SEARCHING FOR
SURVIVORS COMBING THROUGH
MOUNTAINS OF SHIFTING DEBRIS.
AUTHORITIES SAY AS MANY AS 2,500
PEOPLE ARE CONFIRMED DEAD.
HUNDREDS ARE MISSING AND AS MANY
AS 6,000 MAY HAVE BEEN INJURED.
>> MOST OF THEM ARE SUFFERING
FROM HEAD INJURIES, SPINE
INJURIES, ABDOMINAL INJURIES.
>> (translated): MY FATHER GOT
INJURED, I LOST MY DAUGHTER, I
BROKE MY LEG, IT IS VERY
DIFFICULT NOW AND I HAVE NOTHING
WITH ME.
>> Stewart: A DOZEN AFTERSHOCKS
HAVE MADE THE SEARCH EVEN MORE
TREACHEROUS ACROSS THE KATHMANDU
VALLEY, WHICH IS HOME TO SOME
2.5 MILLION PEOPLE.
THE CAPITAL CITY ITSELF IS JUST
50 MILES SOUTHEAST OF THE
QUAKE'S EPICENTER.
THOUSANDS OF DISPLACED RESIDENTS
AND TOURISTS ARE BEING FORCED TO
SLEEP OUTSIDE.
>> EVERYONE WAITED FOR IT TO
FINISH.
AND ONCE IT FINISHED THERE WERE
JUST FLOODS OF PEOPLE RUNNING
TO OPEN SPACES.
>> Stewart: LESS THAN 100 MILES
AWAY, IN THE HIMALAYAS, THE
FIRST RESCUE CREWS CARRIED 15
CLIMBERS TO SAFETY THIS MORNING
AFTER THE EARTHQUAKE SPARKED AN
AVALANCHE ON MOUNT EVEREST.
AT LEAST 17 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
BACK IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL,
THE QUAKE DESTROYED SOME OF
NEPAL'S TREASURED ARCHITECTURE,
INCLUDING THIS LANDMARK BUILT
FOR NEPAL'S QUEEN IN 1832.
NEPAL IS ONE OF THE WORLD'S
POOREST COUNTRIES.
INDIA, CHINA AND SINGAPORE HAVE
DISPATCHED RESCUE TEAMS TO THE
REGION.
THE U.S. HAS SENT A RESPONSE
TEAM ALONG WITH AN INITIAL
MILLION DOLLARS IN AID.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT SAID TODAY
THAT THREE AMERICANS WERE KILLED
IN THE EARTHQUAKE.
TONIGHT, NEPAL'S GOVERNMENT IS
WORKING TO SET UP 16 RELIEF
STATIONS ACROSS THE AFFECTED
AREA IN AN EFFORT TO DISTRIBUTE
WATER, FOOD AND MEDICINE.
IN BALTIMORE, A DEMONSTRATION
OVER THE DEATH OF 25-YEAR-OLD
FREDDIE GRAY STARTED PEACEFULLY
BUT TURNED VIOLENT LAST NIGHT
WHEN PROTESTERS CLASHED WITH
POLICE.
AUTHORITIES ARRESTED ABOUT 34
PEOPLE.
SIX OFFICERS SUFFERED MINOR
INJURIES.
FANS ATTENDING THE BALTIMORE
ORIOLES GAME WERE TOLD TO STAY
IN PLACE BECAUSE OF SAFETY
CONCERNS.
I'M JOINED NOW ONCE AGAIN BY
BALTIMORE SUN REPORTER LUKE
BROADWATER.
>> Stewart: LUKE, DO YOU KNOW
WHY THINGS TURNED VIOLENT?
>> WE DON'T KNOW EXACTLY WHY
THINGS TURNED VIOLENT.
UP UNTIL MID AFTERNOON, IT HAD
HAD
BEEN A VERY PEACEFUL PROTEST.
1,200 PEOPLE HAS DESCENDED ON
CITY HALL AND PEOPLE WERE
EXPECT, RESPECTING THEM,
GATHERING AMEND THE POLICE LET
THEM DO IT AND THEN THE MARCH
CAME DOWN TO CAMDEN YARD WHERE
THE ORIOLES PLAY AND THINGS
REALLY GOT OUT OF CONTROL, I
WOULD SAY LESS THAN 100 PEOPLE
WERE INVOLVED IN THE VIOLENCE
AND THE RIOTING AND LOOTING SO
IT WAS A SMALL MINORITY OF THE
PROTESTERS, BUT THEY DID A LOT
OF PROPERTY DAMAGE AND SOME
PEOPLE DID GET INJURED.
THEY SMASHED THE WINDOWS OF
POLICE CARS AND SOME CIVILIAN
CARS, THE WINDOWS OF PROPERTY --
OF BUSINESSES IN THE AREA.
THERE WERE SOME, AND THERE WERE
SOME ASSAULTS.
SO IT WAS NOT A PRETTY SIGHT
LAST NIGHT IN BALTIMORE.
>> Stewart: CAN YOU DESCRIBE
THE LEVEL OF THE POLICE FORCE?
THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF
DISCUSSION ABOUT THE
MILITARIZATION OF THE POLICE.
HOW MANY POLICE OFFICERS, WERE
THEY IN COMBAT GEAR?
>> YES.
THEY DID NOT START OUT IN COMBAT
GEAR, BUT THEY DID ACQUIRE IT AS
THE NIGHT WENT ON.
BY OUR ESTIMATION THERE WERE
OVER 1,000, I AM SORRY, OVER
1,000 POLICE OFFICERS, PROBABLY
ABOUT 1,300 FROM THE POLICE
FORCE, THE STATE TROOPERS DID
COME IN AS WELL AND SOME FROM
THE COUNTY POLICE FORCE AS WELL.
THEY HAD SHIELDS, THEY HAD THEIR
BATONS OUT.
THEY HAD THEIR HELMETS AND THEY
DID ENGAGE IN SOME CROWD CONTROL
TACTICS THAT, YOU KNOW, LOOKED
LIKE MILITARY OPERATIONS IN
TERMS OF PUSHING THE CROWD BACK
WITH THE SHIELDS.
THEY HAD THE POLICE CHOPPER
SHOUTING ORDERS TO DISPERSE AND
THEN THREATENED THOSE WHO DID
NOT WITH ARREST.
>> Stewart: THE MAYOR AND THE
COMMISSIONER ARE MAKING A
DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN THE
PROTESTERS AND PEOPLE THEY ARE
CALLING AGITATORS.
TO WHOM ARE THEY REFERRING?
>> YES.
YOU ARE RIGHT.
EVEN BEFORE THE PROTESTS STARTED
THE MAYOR AND THE POLICE
COMMISSIONER AND FAITH LEADERS
IN BALTIMORE EXPRESSED A LOT OF
CONCERN ABOUT OUTSIDE GROUPS
COMING IN.
THEY DIDN'T MENTION ANYONE BY
NAME.
I BELIEVE THEY WERE REFERRING TO
MR. SHABAZZ, THE HEAD OF THE
NEW BLACK PANTHERS.
THEY WERE WORRIED ABOUT HIS
INFLUENCE AND OTHERS INFLUENCE
AND THE PROTEST POTENTIALLY
TURNING VIOLENT.
WE HAD HAD A WEEK OF NONVIOLENT
PROTESTS IN BALTIMORE AND LAST
NIGHT WAS THE FIRST REAL
VIOLENCE THAT WE SAW.
>> Stewart: LUKE BROADWATER
FROM THE BALTIMORE SUN, THANKS,
LUKE.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: TODAY INVESTIGATORS
IN OHIO RETURNED TO THE SCENE OF
THE POLICE SHOOTING THAT CLAIMED
THE LIFE OF 12-YEAR-OLD TAMIR
RICE.
THEY SET UP SOPHISTICATED
CAMERAS TO PUT TOGETHER A HIGH-
TECH RECREATION OF THE INCIDENT.
THE CUYAHOGA COUNTY SHERIFF'S
OFFICE AND THE STATE'S BUREAU OF
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION TOOK A
360-DEGREE SCAN OF THE AREA
WHERE RICE WAS KILLED ON
NOVEMBER 22.
THEY'LL USE THE FOOTAGE TO PUT
TOGETHER A 3-D MOCK-UP OF THE
SHOOTING.
TAMIR RICE'S FAMILY IS SUING THE
CITY AND THE TWO OFFICERS
INVOLVED.
RUSSIAN HACKERS REPORTEDLY
MANAGED TO GET A HOLD OF SOME OF
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S EMAILS DURING
A COMPUTER BREACH LAST YEAR.
THE HACKERS TARGETED THE STATE
DEPARTMENT'S UNCLASSIFIED
COMPUTER SYSTEM.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAID NO
CLASSIFIED INFORMATION WAS
COMPROMISED.
HOWEVER, THE "NEW YORK TIMES"
NOW REPORTS THE HACKERS SNARED
SOME ARCHIVED CORRESPONDENCE
WITHIN THE ADMINISTRATION.
THOSE MESSAGES MAY INCLUDE THE
PRESIDENT'S EMAIL WITH PEOPLE
OUTSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE.
AN OFFICIAL CALLED THE RUSSIAN
ATTACK ONE OF THE MOST
SOPHISTICATED TO DATE.
ON TUESDAY, THE U.S. SUPREME
COURT WILL TAKE ON A HANDFUL OF
HIGHLY-ANTICIPATED CASES
CONCERNING SAME-SEX MARRIAGE.
THE COURT WILL HEAR ARGUMENTS
FROM FOUR STATES THAT HAVE
SUCCESSFULLY BANNED IT.
PROMINENT ATTORNEY DAVID BOIES
IS ONE OF THE LAWYERS FIGHTING
THE BANS.
HE TOLD NBC's "MEET THE PRESS"
HE EXPECTS THE COURT WILL
EFFECTIVELY LEGALIZE SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE NATIONWIDE.
>> JUST IN THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS, WE'VE SEEN A TREMENDOUS
MOVEMENT THAT I THINK MAKES IT
EASIER NOW FOR THE SUPREME COURT
TO MAKE THAT TOTAL DECISION.
>> Stewart: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
THIS STORY TOMORROW ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
IN MALAYSIA, POLICE HAVE
ARRESTED TWELVE MEN SUSPECTED OF
PLOTTING AN ISIS-INSPIRED
TERRORIST ATTACK ON GOVERNMENT
TARGETS AROUND KUALA LUMPUR.
THE SUSPECTS RANGE IN AGE FROM
17 TO 41 AND ARE REPORTEDLY
LINKED TO A SENIOR ISLAMIC STATE
LEADER IN SYRIA.
INVESTIGATORS SAY THEY ALSO
SEIZED EQUIPMENT TO MAKE
EXPLOSIVES AND AN ISLAMIC STATE
FLAG DURING THE ARRESTS.
>> Stewart: EARLIER THIS WEEK,
THE NEWSHOUR BROUGHT YOU A
SPECIAL REPORT ON HIGH-TECH
MAPPING THAT HELPS RESEARCHERS
UNDERSTAND AND EVEN PREDICT
MAJOR DISEASE OUTBREAKS, LIKE
MALARIA.
NOW WE'RE LEARNING THAT MILLIONS
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE MOST
VULNERABLE TO THAT DEADLY
DISEASE COULD BE SAVED BY A
VACCINE.
HEALTH CORRESPONDENT ALOK JHA
EXPLAINS WHY THE COST OF THE NEW
VACCINE COULD BECOME AN ISSUE IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST MALARIA.
>> IT HAS BEEN A LONG TIME
COMING.
AFTER 20 YEARS, SUSTAINED EFFORT
OF VACCINES FOR A DISEASE THAT
HAS CRIPPLED SO MANY COUNTRIES
IN AFRICA.
>> GHANA LAST YEAR, TO SEE THE
CLINICAL TRIALS FOR THE NEW
MALARIA VACCINE, SCIENTISTS
HOPED TO PREVENT UP TO HALF OF
THE CASES.
NOW, AFTER GIVING IT TO 15,000
CHILDREN, THEY FOUND IT REDUCES
CASE BY ABOUT A THIRD.
>> WE REALLY DO HAVE A MALARIA
VACCINE WE NEED ONE MORE
EFFECTIVE THAN THAT BUT THIS IS
THE FIRST ONE AND BECAUSE
MALARIA IS SUCH A MAJOR PROBLEM,
SO MANY CHILDREN DIE FROM
MALARIA, UNDER SOME
CIRCUMSTANCES USING A VACCINE
THAT ONLY GIVES YOU 30 PERCENT
OF PROTECTION MAY BE A VERY
USEFUL THING TO DO.
>> WHEN A MOSQUITO BITES IT
RELEASES PARASITES INTO YOUR
BLOODSTREAM, THEY MULTIPLY INTO
THOUSANDS OF NEW PARASITES,
WHICH ATTACK RED BLOOD CELLS,
CAUSING FEVER AND DEATH.
THE VACCINE HAS TWO COMPONENTS,
ONE FROM THE PARASITES AND ONE
FROM HEPATITIS B VIRUS WHICH
TOGETHER KICK START THE IMMUNE
SYSTEM.
THE TREATMENT REQUIRES THREE
DOSES OF VACCINE AND A BOOSTER
FOR THE BEST RESULTS.
THAT WOULD BE EASIER TO
ADMINISTER, THAT IS EASIER TO
ADMINISTER IN COUNTRIES WITH A
POOR HEALTHCARE STRUCTURE.
BUT THE MAIN THING IS THE COST.
PAYING FOR MILLIONS OF THE
VACCINE FOR MILLIONS IS OUT OF
REACH OF MOST AFRICAN COUNTRIES.
>> MEASLES AND POLIOS WERE,
STARTED ONLY WHEN STRATEGIC SEEN
WAS PAID FOR BY OTHERS.
THE EXPERIMENTS ARE OVER,
INTERNATIONAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH
AUTHORITIES WILL NOW WORK OUT
WHERE AND WHEN THIS LIFESAVING
VACCINE COULD BE USE.
>> Stewart: NOW FOR OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
EVEN THOUGH THE UNITED STATES
RANKS AMONG THE TOP NATIONS FOR
INTERNET USERS, THE U.S.
ACTUALLY LAGS BEHIND OTHER
COUNTRIES WHEN IT COMES TO
AFFORDABLE ACCESS TO THE WEB.
HERE IN NEW YORK CITY, MOST
PEOPLE PAY ABOUT 50 TO $60 A
MONTH TO GET ONLINE.
BUT IN PLACES LIKE LONDON, SEOUL
AND PARIS, IT COSTS NEARLY HALF
THAT.
AND NOT ONLY IS ACCESS IN THE
U.S. MORE EXPENSIVE, IT'S ALSO
SLOWER.
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLAINS HOW
THAT'S AFFECTING THE POOR MOST
OF ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: TWO YEARS AGO
KAREN BEEN NEVER HAD TO WALK TO
GET SOMEPLACE.
SHE OWNED A CAR.
SHE ALSO HAD A CORPORATE JOB IN
ATLANTA AND A HOUSE WITH A POOL
IN THE BACKYARD.
BUT TODAY THIS SINGLE MOTHER OF
TWO BOYS IS UNEMPLOYED AND ON
THE JOB HUNT IN NEW YORK CITY.
THEY MOVED HERE FOR A BETTER
LIFE BUT QUICKLY RAN OUT OF
MONEY.
AND THE ONE THING SHE NEEDS
RIGHT NOW TO GET BACK ON HER
FEET IS WHAT MOST OF US TAKE FOR
GRANTED.
>> I FEEL THAT THE INTERNET WILL
DEFINITELY BE A CATALYST IN ME
GETTING OUT OF THE SITUATION WE
ARE IN.
IF YOU ARE LOOKING FOR A JOB
THEY WANT ME TO GO ONLINE AND
FILL OUT AN APPLICATION.
THERE IS NO MORE HARDCOPIES WHEN
IT COMES TO RESUMES.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT IT'S
DIFFICULT FOR BEEN TO GO ONLINE
AND SEND OUT HER RESUME.
SHE CAN'T AFFORD THE MONTHLY
INTERNET BILL, WHICH COSTS
AROUND $60 A MONTH IN NEW YORK
CITY.
SO AFTER SCHOOL, THE THREE MAKE
A BEELINE FOR THE LIBRARY.
BEEN'S 11-YEAR-OLD SON ISHAN
SIDDIQUI RUSHES TO FINISH HIS
HOMEWORK BEFORE THE LIBRARY
CLOSES.
>> IT WAS KIND OF DIFFICULT
BECAUSE SOMETIMES IN CLASS I
DIDN'T UNDERSTAND SOMETHING AND
I WANTED TO GO ON THE COMPUTER
BUT I COULDN'T GO ON IT SO I
COULDN'T RESEARCH WHAT I WANTED
TO.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BEEN FAMILY
IS ONE OF 730,000 HOUSEHOLDS IN
NEW YORK THAT DOES NOT HAVE
INTERNET IN THE HOME.
THE CITY SAYS IT'S DOING ITS
PART TO PULL NEW YORKERS OUT OF
THE DIGITAL DARK, BUT IT TAKES
MORE THAN JUST HAVING AN
INTERNET CONNECTION.
THAT CONNECTION HAS TO BE
AFFORDABLE TOO.
>> THE INTERNET TODAY IS REALLY
WHAT RAILROADS AND ROADS WERE AT
THE TURN OF THE CENTURY; THEY'RE
OUR PRIMARY WAY BOTH OF DOING
COMMERCE AND FOR PEOPLE TO GET
CONNECTED TO THE ECONOMY, TO GET
EDUCATION.
>> Sreenivasan: MAYA WILEY IS A
COUNSEL TO NEW YORK CITY MAYOR
BILL DE BLASIO.
HER MISSION IS TO MAKE HIGH
SPEED INTERNET MORE ACCESSIBLE
TO NEW YORKERS, ESPECIALLY FOR
PEOPLE WHO CAN'T AFFORD TO PAY
FOR BASIC BROADBAND.
SHE CONSIDERS IT A SOCIAL
JUSTICE ISSUE.
>> NO MATTER WHO YOU ARE AND NO
MATTER YOUR FINANCIAL RESOURCES,
YOU WILL BE ABLE TO GET ONLINE
FOR FREE AND GET HIGH SPEED
INTERNET.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE CITY IS
FOCUSED ON ROLLING OUT FREE
WIRELESS LIKE WITH THESE VANS
THAT DOUBLE AS MOBILE COMPUTER
LABS AND WI-FI HUBS.
THEY'RE USUALLY PARKED IN FRONT
OF PUBLIC HOUSING APARTMENTS.
THE CITY IS ALSO EXPANDING WI-FI
UNDERGROUND AND IN PUBLIC SPACES
LIKE MADISON SQUARE PARK.
AND LATER THIS YEAR, THE CITY
WILL TURN DEFUNCT PAY PHONES
INTO FREE WIRELESS HUBS.
PUBLIC LIBRARIES ARE ALSO
JOINING IN, LENDING OUT FREE
HOTSPOTS-- MOBILE DEVICES THAT
TRANSMIT A WIRELESS SIGNAL--
THAT LOW-INCOME FAMILIES CAN
CHECK OUT, MUCH LIKE BOOKS.
BEEN AND HER SONS TOOK ONE HOME.
>> WHEN THE LIBRARY CLOSES ON
FRIDAY, IT CLOSES REALLY EARLY,
BUT WHEN I GO HOME I CAN FINISH
DOING WHAT I WANT ON THE
COMPUTER, AND NOW WHEN I STUDY I
GET BETTER GRADES.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT IN
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE THE CITY'S
WIRELESS PROGRAMS DON'T YET
EXTEND FAR ENOUGH, RESIDENTS ARE
LITERALLY TAKING MEASURES INTO
THEIR OWN HANDS.
A FEW TIMES A WEEK ROBERT SMITH
CLIMBS TO THE ROOFTOPS OF RED
HOOK, BROOKLYN.
WITH EQUIPMENT AND FUNDING FROM
THE RED HOOK INITIATIVE, A
COMMUNITY CENTER THAT RECEIVES
SUPPORT FROM THE CITY, HE
INSTALLS TINY ROUTERS THAT BEAM
OUT WIRELESS SIGNALS.
THERE ARE DOZENS OF THESE
THROUGHOUT THE NEIGHBORHOOD,
ESSENTIALLY CREATING A BLANKET
OF FREE WI-FI.
>> HAVING INTERNET ACCESS JUST
OPENS UP A WHOLE ANOTHER WORLD
OF OPPORTUNITY, LIKE PEOPLE CAN
OBTAIN LIKE A COLLEGE LEVEL
DEGREE OF EDUCATION JUST FROM
THE INTERNET.
>> Sreenivasan: SMITH HAS LIVED
IN PUBLIC HOUSING HIS WHOLE LIFE
AND SAYS MOST OF HIS FRIENDS
CAN'T AFFORD AN INTERNET BILL.
THAT'S BECAUSE 60% OF THE
RESIDENTS IN RED HOOK LIVE IN
LOW INCOME PUBLIC HOUSING, WHERE
THE AVERAGE FAMILY'S INCOME IS
JUST OVER $23,000.
>> IT'S RIDICULOUSLY EXPENSIVE
HERE IN THE UNITED STATES TO
HAVE THIS BASIC THING IN YOUR
HOUSE THAT MAKES POSSIBLE EVERY
OTHER ASPECT OF LIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: SUSAN CRAWFORD
IS A PROFESSOR AT CARDOZO LAW
SCHOOL IN NEW YORK CITY.
SHE ALSO SERVED AS PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S SPECIAL ASSISTANT FOR
TECHNOLOGY.
SHE SAYS PEOPLE TODAY EXPECT TO
HAVE INTERNET ACCESS ANYTIME, IN
THE SAME WAY THEY EXPECT WATER
FROM A FAUCET OR POWER FROM AN
ELECTRICAL OUTLET, MUCH LIKE A
PUBLIC UTILITY.
>> IN AMERICA, WE'RE IN THIS
WEIRD MOMENT, WHERE ALTHOUGH IT
FEELS LIKE A UTILITY TO MOST
AMERICANS, AND THEY NEED, THEY
KNOW THEY CAN'T HAVE A HOUSE
WITHOUT IT OR BUSINESS WITHOUT
IT.
IT'S A LUXURY THAT ACTUALLY IS A
UTILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: A LUXURY, SHE
SAYS, BECAUSE A HANDFUL OF
INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS, LIKE
TIME WARNER AND COMCAST, HAVE
CORNERED THE MARKET ON
BROADBAND, LEAVING CUSTOMERS
WITH FEWER CHOICES AND HIGHER
PRICES-- ON AVERAGE $30 AND $60
A MONTH.
>> THAT'S HAPPENED BECAUSE OF A
LACK OF REGULATION.
DOESN'T HAPPEN BY MAGIC.
IT HAPPENS BECAUSE IT'S IN THEIR
INTERESTS TO CONTROL MARKETS AND
REAP STEADY PROFITS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALTHOUGH THE
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION OFFICIALLY CLASSIFIED
BROADBAND INTERNET AS A PUBLIC
UTILITY THIS PAST FEBRUARY, IT
SAID THAT IT WOULD NOT GET
INVOLVED WITH PRICING DECISIONS.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER OPTIONS.
SEVERAL U.S. CITIES ARE NOW
OFFERING THEIR OWN PUBLICLY-
FUNDED BROADBAND SERVICES--
CITIES LIKE CHATTANOOGA,
TENNESSEE, WILSON, NORTH
CAROLINA, BRISTOL, VIRGINIA,
LAFAYETTE, LOUISIANA, AND CEDAR
FALLS, IOWA.
THE HOPE IS THAT THESE SERVICES
WILL ATTRACT NEW BUSINESSES AND
EXPAND INTERNET ACCESS TO MORE
PEOPLE ACROSS THE ECONOMIC
SPECTRUM.
BUT THERE ARE SOME WHO ARE
CRITICAL OF THIS NEW MODEL.
>> WHEN GOVERNMENTS GO INTO
BUSINESS AND COMPETE WITH THE
PRIVATE SECTOR, IT'S JUST NOT
THEIR, IT'S JUST NOT THEIR
FORTE.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF EISENACH IS
WITH THE AMERICAN ENTERPRISE
INSTITUTE AND STUDIES POLICIES
THAT AFFECT THE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY SECTOR.
HE SAYS THAT, ALTHOUGH THE
GOVERNMENT CAN PLAY A ROLE IN
BRINGING INTERNET ACCESS TO
POORER AMERICANS, PUBLIC
BROADBAND SERVICES CAN'T KEEP UP
WITH THE INNOVATION THAT THE
PRIVATE BROADBAND INDUSTRY
OFFERS.
>> THE LARGEST INVESTORS IN THE
UNITED STATES TODAY, ARE
AMERICA'S BROADBAND COMPANIES.
THEY'RE AT&T AND VERIZON ARE
ALWAYS ON THE TOP, LITERALLY,
THE TOP OF THE LIST THAT THE
COMPANIES SPENDING THE MOST
MONEY.
WHAT YOU DON'T WANT IS
GOVERNMENT COMING IN AND
REPLACING ALL OF THE INNOVATION,
ALL OF THE DYNAMISM, ALL OF THE
GROWTH, ALL OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL
PROGRESS THAT WE'RE SEEING
THROUGHOUT THE INTERNET,
INCLUDING IN THE BROADBAND
MARKET.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR HER PART,
MAYA WILEY SAYS THAT WHILE A
PUBLIC BROADBAND MODEL ISN'T
REALISTIC FOR NEW YORK, THE CITY
CAN PLAY A ROLE IN BRINGING FREE
INTERNET TO ITS POORER
RESIDENTS, AS WELL AS BRINGING
DOWN THE COST.
>> WE ARE THE LARGEST CITY IN
THE COUNTRY AND ONE OF THE MOST
DIVERSE.
THAT MEANS WE CAN'T JUST SIMPLY
REPLICATE A MODEL FROM
CHATTANOOGA, TENNESSEE, EVEN
THOUGH IT'S A WONDERFUL MODEL,
WE'RE JUST VERY DIFFERENT.
WHEN WE TAKE OUR PAY PHONES AND
TURN THEM INTO WIRELESS HOT
SPOTS, AND THEY'RE FREE HOT
SPOTS, THAT IS A FORM OF
COMPETITION FOR, SAY, TIME
WARNER CABLE THAT HAS
SUBSCRIBERS THAT PAY MONEY FOR
WIRELESS SERVICE, RIGHT?
THAT SHOULD HELP CREATE SOME
PRICE PRESSURE DOWNWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: WILEY SAYS
THERE'S NO ONE-SIZE-FITS ALL
SOLUTION.
THE CITY IS LOOKING TO EXPAND
RED HOOK'S WIRELESS MESH PROGRAM
TO OTHER COMMUNITIES.
WILEY'S TEAM ALSO PLANS ON
WORKING WITH PRIVATE COMPANIES
TO CREATE MORE FREE WIRELESS, AS
IT DID WITH SPRINT FOR THE
LIBRARY HOTSPOTS.
KAREN BEEN AND HER SONS HAVE HAD
THE DEVICE NOW FOR FOUR MONTHS.
SHE RECENTLY STARTED TAKING
E.M.T. TRAINING CLASSES, AND NOW
THAT SHE HAS INTERNET IN THE
HOUSE, SHE CAN EASILY DO HER
ASSIGNMENTS ONLINE.
SHE'S HOPING THAT INTERNET
ACCESS WILL GIVE HER THE EDGE
SHE NEEDS TO PASS HER
CERTIFICATION TEST IN JUNE AND,
WITH ANY LUCK, TO FIND A JOB.
>> IT WOULDN'T BE POSSIBLE TO
PAY 50, 60, $70 A MONTH FOR
HIGH-SPEED INTERNET.
DEFINITELY NOT.
SO HAVING ACCESS TO THE WEB AT
HOME ALLOWS ME TO LOOK FOR
EMPLOYMENT MORE FREELY.
>> Sreenivasan: BEEN IS HOPEFUL
THAT THE CITY'S WIRELESS WILL
SOON OPEN DOORS FOR HER AND HER
SONS.
>> Stewart: WANT TO KNOW HOW THE
PRICE AND SPEED OF INTERNET IN
THE U.S. COMPARES TO THE REST OF
THE WORLD?
SEE OUR INFOGRAPHIC ON
pbs.org/newshour.
IN OUR SEGMENT THAT AIRED ON
YESTERDAY'S PROGRAM ABOUT
ISRAEL'S WATER SURPLUS, WE SAID
THAT UNDER A 1994 AGREEMENT,
ISRAEL SUPPLIES SOME WATER TO
JORDAN AT NO COST.
HOWEVER, ISRAEL DOES CHARGE
JORDAN FOR THE OPERATING COSTS
OF SUPPLYING THAT WATER.
WE REGRET THE ERROR.
>> Stewart: THE "WASHINGTON
POST" IS REPORTING ON A
STARTLING HEALTH CRISIS IN THIS
COUNTRY: THE NUMBER OF WOMEN IN
THE U.S. WHO DIE IN CHILDBIRTH
IS NEARING THE HIGHEST RATE IN A
QUARTER-CENTURY.
AN ESTIMATED 18.5 MOTHERS DIED
FOR EVERY 100,000 BIRTHS IN
2013, COMPARED WITH 7.2 IN 1987.
THE POST REPORTS THAT THIS
TRANSLATES TO "...A WOMAN
GIVING BIRTH HERE IS TWICE AS
LIKELY TO DIE THAN IN SAUDI
ARABIA AND THREE TIMES AS LIKELY
THAN IN THE UNITED KINGDOM."
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER
DANIELLE PAQUETTE WHO WROTE THE
STORY JOINS US NOW.
>> Stewart: IN YOUR PIECE,
THERE IS A STARTLING LINE AND I
AM JUST GOING READ IT, IT SAYS
THE UNITED STATES IS THE ONLY
ADVANCED ECONOMY IN THE WORLD
WITH RISING MATERNAL MORTALITY
RATES.
WHAT IS GOING ON IN THIS COUNTRY
AS OPPOSED TO OTHER ADVANCED
ECONOMIES THAT IS CAUSING THIS
PROBLEM?
>> WELL, OFTEN THIS PROBLEM
CONFOUNDS A LOT IN THE MEDICAL
COMMUNITY.
THERE IS NOT ONE THING DRAGGING
THE PROBLEM.
EXPERTS, I HAVE SPOKE TO TELL ME
THAT SOME PARTS OF THE COUNTRY
THERE IS -- THERE ARE GAPS IN
HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE,
ESPECIALLY IN THE SOUTH.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN MISSISSIPPI, ONE
OF THE HIGHEST MATERNAL
MORTALITY RATES, THAT THE STATE
DID NOT EXPAND MEDICAID OR
SOMETHING LIKE 100,000 PEOPLE
WHO DON'T HAVE ACCESS TO ANY
HEALTHCARE, AND MANY OF THEM ARE
WOMEN, YOU HAVE IN MISSISSIPPI
160 DOCTORS, 100,000 RESIDENTS,
THAT DRIVES PART OF THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Stewart: ONE OF THE
INTERESTING THINGS IN YOUR
PIECE IS THAT THE PROBLEMS ARE
DESCRIBED AS PREVENTABLE.
SO WHAT IS STOPPING PEOPLE FROM
PREVENTING THEM?
>> WELL, SOME DOCTORS SAY IT IS
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE AS GETTING A
ROUTINE CHECKUP.
SO MANY WOMEN LACK ACCESS TO
HEALTHCARE, ESPECIALLY IN THE
SOUTH, AND SO MAYBE JUST SOME OF
THE SIMPLE GOING TO THAT DOCTOR
AND SAYING, HEY, SOMETHING
DOESN'T FEEL RIGHT.
HELP ME OUT.
ANOTHER THING, OFFICIAL REASON
OFTENTIMES DOCTORS WILL SEE
WOMEN, WOMEN MIGHT SAY SOMETHING
IS OFF, SOMETHING IS NOT RIGHT
AND PHYSICIANS MAY WRITE THAT
OFF AS STRESS OR PERHAPS JUST
PARANOIA, AND THAT, AND NURSES
SAY MAY GO HOME AND THEN SHE MAY
ENTER PREMATURE LABOR AND START
BLEEDING, IF SHE WOULD HAVE BEEN
AT THE HOSPITAL AT THE TIME OF
THIS, THAT COULD POSSIBLY HAVE
SAVED HER LIFE.
>> Stewart: THIS MAKES ME
THINK THAT THIS IS JUST A VERY
STARK EXAMPLE OF THE BIGGER
ISSUE OF THAT CERTAIN POPULATION
MS. THIS COUNTRY BASED ON
WHETHER IT IS RACE OR BASED ON
ECONOMIC STANDING HAVE BETTER
ACCESS TO BETTER HEALTHCARE.
>> IT IS INCREDIBLE TO SEE THE
NUMBERS, IT IS VERY DRASTIC, IN
SOME PARTS OF THE COUNTRY
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMEN ARE
NEARLY TWICE AS LIKELY TO DIE OF
PREGNANCY RELATED COMPLICATIONS.
>> Stewart: DANIEL PAQUETTE
FOR THE WASHINGTON POST, THANKS
FOR SHARING YOUR REPORTING.
>> THANK YOU, ALLISON.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Stewart: REPORTERS,
POLITICIANS, AND CELEBRITIES ALL
GATHERED LAST NIGHT AT THE
ANNUAL WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENTS DINNER, AN EVENT
THAT HONORS WASHINGTON
JOURNALISTS FOR THEIR WORK.
BUT ITS BECOME BETTER KNOWN AS
THE NIGHT WHEN THE COMMANDER IN
CHIEF TRIES TO BECOME THE
COMEDIAN IN CHIEF.
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE'S CECILY
STRONG TOOK A SATURDAY NIGHT OFF
TO HOST THE EVENT.
>> HILLARY'S CAMPAIGN SLOGAN IS
IT'S YOUR TIME, WHICH I ASSUME
IS WHAT SHE SAYS INTO A MIRROR
AS SHE DEADLIFTS 200 POUNDS
THAT'S "RAND," LIKE HE DIDN'T
WIN, BUT AT LEAST HE "RAN-D."
>> Stewart: AND KEEPING WITH
TRADITION, STRONG MADE FUN OF
PRESIDENTIAL PROBLEMS.
>> I'LL BET WHEN THE PRESIDENT
WALKED IN AND SAW ALL THOSE
BELLHOPS HE SAID, "FINALLY SOME
DECENT SECURITY."
>> Stewart: THE PRESIDENT SPARED
NO ONE, INCLUDING HIMSELF, WITH
JOKES ON EVERYTHING FROM HIS
EXECUTIVE ACTIONS TO FOREIGN
RELATIONS.
>> I LOOK SO OLD, JOHN BOEHNER
HAS ALREADY INVITED NETANYAHU TO
SPEAK AT MY FUNERAL.
I STILL HAVE TO FIX A BROKEN
IMMIGRATION SYSTEM, ISSUE VETO
THREATS, NEGOTIATE WITH IRAN--
ALL WHILE FINDING TIME TO PRAY
FIVE TIMES A DAY.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Stewart: THE PRESIDENT CAME
OUT SWINGING AT REPUBLICANS.
>> DICK CHENEY SAYS HE THINKS
I'M THE WORST PRESIDENT OF HIS
LIFETIME.
WHICH IS INTERESTING, BECAUSE I
THINK DICK CHENEY IS THE WORST
PRESIDENT OF MY LIFETIME.
>> Stewart: BUT HE DIDN'T LET
DEMOCRATS OFF THE HOOK.
>> TODAY, THANKS TO OBAMACARE,
YOU NO LONGER HAVE TO WORRY
ABOUT LOSING YOUR INSURANCE IF
YOU LOSE YOUR JOB.
YOU'RE WELCOME, SENATE
DEMOCRATS.
>> BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT
WE RETURN TO OUR LEAD STORY FROM
NEPAL.
NOW ESTIMATES 540,000 CHILDREN
IN IN, ARE IN URGENT NEED OF
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANT BECAUSE
OF YESTERDAY'S EARTHQUAKE,
DOZENS OF COUNTRIES ARE SENDING
TEAMS OF EMERGENCY WORKERS AND
OTHER AID TO THE REGION TONIGHT.
ON TOMORROW'S NEWSHOUR UPCOMING
SUPREME COURT'S ARGUMENTS ON GAY
MARRIAGE WITH TWO COUPLE WHOSE
ARE AT THE CENTER OF THE CASE.
>> ONE REASON WHY MARRIAGE
EQUALITY IS SO IMPORTANT TO US
IS SO OUR KIDS CAN BE LEGALLY
BOTH OF OURS.
>> THESE ARE NOT POLITICALLY.
>> THEY SHOULD BE TREATED FAIRLY
THERE IS NO QUESTION AMOUNT THAT
BUT TO BE TREATED FAIRLY DOES
NOT REQUIRE YOU TO CHANGE THE
DEFINITION OF MARRIAGE.
>> Stewart: THAT'S IT FOR THIS
EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
HARI SREENIVASAN WILL BE BACK
NEXT WEEK.
I AM ALISON STEWART, GOOD NIGHT.